24101034D
HOUSE BILL NO. 2
Offered January 10, 2024
Prefiled November 20, 2023
A BILL to amend and reenact §§15.2-915.5, 18.2-308.09,
18.2-308.2:1, 18.2-308.2:2, 18.2-308.2:3, 18.2-308.2:5, 18.2-308.7, and 19.2-386.28
of the Code of Virginia and to amend the Code of Virginia by adding sections
numbered 18.2-287.4:1, 18.2-287.4:2, 18.2-308.1:9, and 18.2-309.1, relating to
purchase, possession, sale, transfer, etc., of assault firearms and certain
ammunition feeding devices prohibited; penalty.
----------
Patron-- Helmer
----------
Committee Referral Pending
----------
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Virginia:
1. That §§15.2-915.5, 18.2-308.09, 18.2-308.2:1,
18.2-308.2:2, 18.2-308.2:3, 18.2-308.2:5, 18.2-308.7, and 19.2-386.28 of the
Code of Virginia are amended and reenacted and that the Code of Virginia is
amended by adding sections numbered 18.2-287.4:1, 18.2-287.4:2, 18.2-308.1:9,
and 18.2-309.1 as follows:
§15.2-915.5. Disposition of firearms acquired by localities.
A. No locality or agent of such locality may participate in
any program in which individuals are given a thing of value provided by another
individual or other entity in exchange for surrendering a firearm to the
locality or agent of such locality unless
(i) the governing body of the locality has enacted an ordinance,
pursuant to §15.2-1425, authorizing the participation of the locality or agent
of such locality in such program or (ii) the
program is a voluntary gun buy-back or give-back program for the surrendering
of an assault firearm as defined in §18.2-308.2:2.
B. Any ordinance enacted pursuant to this section shall
require that any firearm received, except a firearm of the type defined in §
18.2-288 or 18.2-299 or a firearm the transfer for which is prohibited by
federal law, shall be destroyed by the locality unless the person surrendering
the firearm requests in writing that the firearm be offered for sale by public
auction or sealed bids to a person licensed as a dealer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §
921 et seq. Notice of the date, time, and place of any sale conducted pursuant
to this subsection shall be given by advertisement in at least two newspapers
published and having general circulation in the Commonwealth, at least one of
which shall have general circulation in the locality in which the property to be
sold is located. At least 30 days shall elapse between publication of the
notice and the auction or the date on which sealed bids will be opened. Any
firearm remaining in possession of the locality or agent of the locality after
attempts to sell at public auction or by sealed bids shall be disposed of in a
manner the locality deems proper, which may include destruction of the firearm
or, subject to any registration requirements of federal law, sale of the
firearm to a licensed dealer.
§18.2-287.4:1.
Importation, sale, possession, etc., of assault firearms prohibited; penalty.
A. As used in
this section, an "assault firearm" means the same as that term is
defined in §18.2-308.2:2.
B. Any person who
imports, sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses, transports, or transfers an
assault firearm is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
C. The provisions
of this section shall not apply to (i) any government officer, agent, or
employee, or member of the Armed Forces of the United States, to the extent
that such person is otherwise authorized to acquire or possess an assault
firearm and does so while acting within the scope of his duties; (ii) the
manufacture of an assault firearm by a firearms manufacturer for the purpose of
sale to any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States or to a
law-enforcement agency in the Commonwealth for use by that agency or its
employees, provided that the manufacturer is properly licensed under federal,
state, and local laws; or (iii) the sale or transfer of an assault firearm by a
licensed dealer to any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States or to a
law-enforcement agency in the Commonwealth for use by that agency or its
employees.
§18.2-287.4:2.
Importation, sale, possession, etc., of assault firearms prohibited by persons
younger than 21 years of age; penalty.
A. As used in
this section, an "assault firearm" means the same as that term is
defined in §18.2-308.2:2 except that it includes such firearms manufactured
before July 1, 2024.
B. Any person
younger than 21 years of age who imports, sells, manufactures, purchases,
possesses, transports, or transfers an assault firearm is guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.
C. The provisions
of this section shall not apply to (i) any government officer, agent, or
employee, or member of the Armed Forces of the United States, to the extent
that such person is otherwise authorized to acquire or possess an assault
firearm and does so while acting within the scope of his duties; (ii) the
manufacture of an assault firearm by a firearms manufacturer for the purpose of
sale to any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States or to a
law-enforcement agency in the Commonwealth for use by that agency or its
employees, provided that the manufacturer is properly licensed under federal,
state, and local laws; or (iii) the sale or transfer of an assault firearm by a
licensed dealer to any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States or to a
law-enforcement agency in the Commonwealth for use by that agency or its
employees.
§18.2-308.09. Disqualifications for a concealed handgun
permit.
The following persons shall be deemed disqualified from
obtaining a permit:
1. An individual who is ineligible to possess a firearm
pursuant to §18.2-308.1:1, 18.2-308.1:2, 18.2-308.1:3, 18.2-308.1:6,
18.2-308.1:7, or
18.2-308.1:8, or 18.2-308.1:9
or the substantially similar law of any other state or of the United States.
2. An individual who was ineligible to possess a firearm
pursuant to §18.2-308.1:1 and who was discharged from the custody of the
Commissioner pursuant to §19.2-182.7 less than five years before the date of
his application for a concealed handgun permit.
3. An individual who was ineligible to possess a firearm
pursuant to §18.2-308.1:2 and whose competency or capacity was restored
pursuant to §64.2-2012 less than five years before the date of his application
for a concealed handgun permit.
4. An individual who was ineligible to possess a firearm under
§18.2-308.1:3 and who was released from commitment less than five years before
the date of this application for a concealed handgun permit.
5. An individual who is subject to a restraining order, or to
a protective order and prohibited by §18.2-308.1:4 from purchasing,
possessing, or transporting a firearm.
6. An individual who is prohibited by §18.2-308.2 from
possessing or transporting a firearm, except that a restoration order may be
obtained in accordance with subsection C of that section.
7. An individual who has been convicted of two or more
misdemeanors within the five-year period immediately preceding the application,
if one of the misdemeanors was a Class 1 misdemeanor, but the judge shall have
the discretion to deny a permit for two or more misdemeanors that are not Class
1. Traffic infractions and misdemeanors set forth in Title 46.2 shall not be
considered for purposes of this disqualification.
8. An individual who is addicted to, or is an unlawful user or
distributor of, marijuana, synthetic cannabinoids, or any controlled substance.
9. An individual who has been convicted of a violation of §
18.2-266 or a substantially similar local ordinance, or of public drunkenness,
or of a substantially similar offense under the laws of any other state, the
District of Columbia, the United States, or its territories within the
three-year period immediately preceding the application.
10. An alien other than an alien lawfully admitted for
permanent residence in the United States.
11. An individual who has been discharged from the armed
forces of the United States under dishonorable conditions.
12. An individual who is a fugitive from justice.
13. An individual who the court finds, by a preponderance of
the evidence, based on specific acts by the applicant, is likely to use a
weapon unlawfully or negligently to endanger others. The sheriff, chief of
police, or attorney for the Commonwealth may submit to the court a sworn,
written statement indicating that, in the opinion of such sheriff, chief of
police, or attorney for the Commonwealth, based upon a disqualifying conviction
or upon the specific acts set forth in the statement, the applicant is likely
to use a weapon unlawfully or negligently to endanger others. The statement of
the sheriff, chief of police, or the attorney for the Commonwealth shall be
based upon personal knowledge of such individual or of a deputy sheriff, police
officer, or assistant attorney for the Commonwealth of the specific acts, or
upon a written statement made under oath before a notary public of a competent
person having personal knowledge of the specific acts.
14. An individual who has been convicted of any assault,
assault and battery, sexual battery, discharging of a firearm in violation of §
18.2-280 or 18.2-286.1 or brandishing of a firearm in violation of §18.2-282
within the three-year period immediately preceding the application.
15. An individual who has been convicted of stalking.
16. An individual whose previous convictions or adjudications
of delinquency were based on an offense that would have been at the time of
conviction a felony if committed by an adult under the laws of any state, the
District of Columbia, the United States or its territories. For purposes of
this disqualifier, only convictions occurring within 16 years following the
later of the date of (i) the conviction or adjudication or (ii) release from
any incarceration imposed upon such conviction or adjudication shall be deemed
to be "previous convictions." Disqualification under this subdivision
shall not apply to an individual with previous adjudications of delinquency who
has completed a term of service of no less than two years in the Armed Forces
of the United States and, if such person has been discharged from the Armed
Forces of the United States, received an honorable discharge.
17. An individual who has a felony charge pending or a charge
pending for an offense listed in subdivision 14 or 15.
18. An individual who has received mental health treatment or
substance abuse treatment in a residential setting within five years prior to
the date of his application for a concealed handgun permit.
19. An individual not otherwise ineligible pursuant to this
article, who, within the three-year period immediately preceding the
application for the permit, was found guilty of any criminal offense set forth
in Chapter 11 (§4.1-1100 et seq.) of Title 4.1, Article 1 (§18.2-247 et
seq.), or former §18.2-248.1:1 or of a criminal offense of illegal possession
or distribution of marijuana, synthetic cannabinoids, or any controlled
substance, under the laws of any state, the District of Columbia, or the United
States or its territories.
20. An individual, not otherwise ineligible pursuant to this
article, with respect to whom, within the three-year period immediately
preceding the application, upon a charge of any criminal offense set forth in
Chapter 11 (§4.1-1100 et seq.) of Title 4.1, Article 1 (§18.2-247 et seq.),
or former §18.2-248.1:1 or upon a charge of illegal possession or distribution
of marijuana, synthetic cannabinoids, or any controlled substance under the
laws of any state, the District of Columbia, or the United States or its
territories, the trial court found that the facts of the case were sufficient
for a finding of guilt and disposed of the case pursuant to §18.2-251 or the
substantially similar law of any other state, the District of Columbia, or the
United States or its territories.
§18.2-308.1:9.
Purchase, possession, or transportation of firearm following conviction for
importation, sale, possession, etc., of assault firearm; penalty.
A. Any
person who knowingly and intentionally purchases, possesses, or transports any
firearm following a misdemeanor conviction for a violation of §18.2-287.4:1 or
18.2-287.4:2 is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
B. Any person convicted
of a violation of
§18.2-287.4:1 or 18.2-287.4:2 or this section
shall be prohibited from purchasing, possessing, or
transporting a firearm for three years following the date of such
conviction at which point the person convicted of
such offense shall no longer be prohibited from purchasing, possessing, or
transporting a firearm pursuant to this section.
Such person shall have his firearms rights restored, unless such person
receives another disqualifying conviction, is subject to a protective order
that would restrict his rights to carry a firearm, or is otherwise prohibited
by law from purchasing, possessing, or transporting a firearm.
§18.2-308.2:1. Prohibiting the selling, etc., of firearms to
certain persons; penalties.
Any person who sells, barters, gives, or furnishes, or has in
his possession or under his control with the intent of selling, bartering,
giving, or furnishing, any firearm to any person he knows is prohibited from
possessing or transporting a firearm pursuant to §18.2-308.1:1, 18.2-308.1:2,
or 18.2-308.1:3, subsection B of §18.2-308.1:4, §18.2-308.1:6 or 18.2-308.2,
subsection B of §18.2-308.2:01, or §18.2-308.7 is guilty of a Class 4 felony.
Any person who sells, barters, gives, or furnishes, or has in
his possession or under his control with the intent of selling, bartering,
giving, or furnishing, any firearm to any person he knows is prohibited from
purchasing, possessing, or transporting a firearm pursuant to §18.2-308.1:7 or,
18.2-308.1:8, or 18.2-308.1:9
is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
However, this prohibition shall not be applicable when the
person convicted of the felony or misdemeanor, adjudicated delinquent, or
acquitted by reason of insanity has (i) been issued a permit pursuant to
subsection C of §18.2-308.2 or been granted relief pursuant to subsection B of
§18.2-308.1:1 or §18.2-308.1:2 or 18.2-308.1:3; (ii) been pardoned or had his
political disabilities removed in accordance with subsection B of §18.2-308.2;
or (iii) obtained a permit to ship, transport, possess, or receive firearms
pursuant to the laws of the United States.
§18.2-308.2:2. Criminal history record information check
required for the transfer of certain firearms.
A. Any person purchasing from a dealer a firearm as herein defined in this section shall consent
in writing, on a form to be provided by the Department of State Police, to have
the dealer obtain criminal history record information
and if such firearm is an assault firearm, such person purchasing such assault
firearm shall be 21 years of age or older. Such form shall
include only the written consent; the name, birth date, gender, race,
citizenship, and social security number and/or any other identification number;
the number of firearms by category intended to be sold, rented, traded, or
transferred; and answers by the applicant to the following questions: (i) has
the applicant been convicted of a felony offense or a misdemeanor offense
listed in §18.2-308.1:8 or 18.2-308.1:9
or found guilty or adjudicated delinquent as a juvenile 14 years of age or older
at the time of the offense of a delinquent act that if committed by an adult
would be a felony or a misdemeanor listed in §18.2-308.1:8
or 18.2-308.1:9; (ii) is the applicant subject to a court
order restraining the applicant from harassing, stalking, or threatening the
applicant's child or intimate partner, or a child of such partner, or is the
applicant subject to a protective order; (iii) has the applicant ever been
acquitted by reason of insanity and prohibited from purchasing, possessing, or
transporting a firearm pursuant to §18.2-308.1:1 or any substantially similar
law of any other jurisdiction, been adjudicated legally incompetent, mentally
incapacitated, or adjudicated an incapacitated person and prohibited from
purchasing a firearm pursuant to §18.2-308.1:2 or any substantially similar
law of any other jurisdiction, been involuntarily admitted to an inpatient
facility or involuntarily ordered to outpatient mental health treatment and
prohibited from purchasing a firearm pursuant to §18.2-308.1:3 or any
substantially similar law of any other jurisdiction, or been the subject of a
temporary detention order pursuant to §37.2-809 and subsequently agreed to a
voluntary admission pursuant to §37.2-805; and (iv) is the applicant subject
to an emergency substantial risk order or a substantial risk order entered
pursuant to §19.2-152.13 or 19.2-152.14 and prohibited from purchasing,
possessing, or transporting a firearm pursuant to §18.2-308.1:6 or any
substantially similar law of any other jurisdiction.
B. 1. No dealer shall sell, rent, trade, or transfer from his
inventory any such firearm to any other person who is a resident of Virginia
until he has (i) obtained written consent and the other information on the
consent form specified in subsection A, and provided the Department of State
Police with the name, birth date, gender, race, citizenship, and social
security and/or any other identification number and the number of firearms by
category intended to be sold, rented, traded, or transferred and;
(ii) requested criminal history record information by a telephone call to or
other communication authorized by the State Police and is authorized by
subdivision 2 to complete the sale or other such transfer;
and (iii) if such firearm is an assault firearm, verified that such person is
21 years of age or older. To establish personal
identification and residence in Virginia for purposes of this section, a dealer
must require any prospective purchaser to present one photo-identification form
issued by a governmental agency of the Commonwealth or by the United States
Department of Defense or a special identification card without a photograph
issued pursuant to §46.2-345.2 that demonstrates that the prospective
purchaser resides in Virginia. For the purposes of this section and
establishment of residency for firearm purchase, residency of a member of the
armed forces shall include both the state in which the member's permanent duty
post is located and any nearby state in which the member resides and from which
he commutes to the permanent duty post. A member of the armed forces whose
photo identification issued by the Department of Defense does not have a
Virginia address may establish his Virginia residency with such photo
identification and either permanent orders assigning the purchaser to a duty
post, including the Pentagon, in Virginia or the purchaser's Leave and Earnings
Statement. When the identification presented to a dealer by the prospective
purchaser is a driver's license or other photo identification issued by the
Department of Motor Vehicles or a special identification card without a
photograph issued pursuant to §46.2-345.2, and such identification form or
card contains a date of issue, the dealer shall not, except for a renewed
driver's license or other photo identification issued by the Department of
Motor Vehicles or a renewed special identification card without a photograph
issued pursuant to §46.2-345.2, sell or otherwise transfer a firearm to the
prospective purchaser until 30 days after the date of issue of an original or
duplicate driver's license or special identification card without a photograph
unless the prospective purchaser also presents a copy of his Virginia
Department of Motor Vehicles driver's record showing that the original date of
issue of the driver's license was more than 30 days prior to the attempted
purchase.
In addition, no dealer shall sell, rent, trade, or transfer
from his inventory any assault firearm to any person
or any semi-automatic center-fire rifle or pistol that expels single or
multiple projectiles by action of an explosion of a combustible material and is
equipped at the time of the offense with a magazine that will hold more than 20
rounds of ammunition or is designed by the manufacturer to accommodate a silencer
or is equipped with a folding stock to any person who is
not a citizen of the United States or who is not a person lawfully admitted for
permanent residence.
Upon receipt of the request for a criminal history record
information check, the State Police shall (a) review its criminal history
record information to determine if the buyer or transferee is prohibited from
possessing or transporting a firearm by state or federal law, (b) inform the
dealer if its record indicates that the buyer or transferee is so prohibited,
and (c) provide the dealer with a unique reference number for that inquiry.
2. The State Police shall provide its response to the
requesting dealer during the dealer's request or by return call without delay.
A dealer who fulfills the requirements of subdivision 1 and is told by the
State Police that a response will not be available by the end of the dealer's
fifth business day may immediately complete the sale or transfer and shall not
be deemed in violation of this section with respect to such sale or transfer.
3. Except as required by subsection D of §9.1-132, the State
Police shall not maintain records longer than 30 days, except for multiple
handgun transactions for which records shall be maintained for 12 months, from
any dealer's request for a criminal history record information check pertaining
to a buyer or transferee who is not found to be prohibited from possessing and
transporting a firearm under state or federal law. However, the log on requests
made may be maintained for a period of 12 months, and such log shall consist of
the name of the purchaser, the dealer identification number, the unique
approval number, and the transaction date.
4. On the last day of the week following the sale or transfer
of any firearm, the dealer shall mail or deliver the written consent form
required by subsection A to the Department of State Police. The State Police
shall immediately initiate a search of all available criminal history record
information to determine if the purchaser is prohibited from possessing or
transporting a firearm under state or federal law. If the search discloses
information indicating that the buyer or transferee is so prohibited from
possessing or transporting a firearm, the State Police shall inform the chief
law-enforcement officer in the jurisdiction where the sale or transfer occurred
and the dealer without delay.
5. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section,
rifles and shotguns may be purchased by persons who are citizens of the United
States or persons lawfully admitted for permanent residence but residents of
other states under the terms of subsections A and B upon furnishing the dealer
with one photo-identification form issued by a governmental agency of the
person's state of residence and one other form of identification determined to
be acceptable by the Department of Criminal Justice Services.
6. For the purposes of this subsection, the phrase
"dealer's fifth business day" does not include December 25.
C. No dealer shall sell, rent, trade, or transfer from his
inventory any firearm, except when the transaction involves a rifle or a
shotgun and can be accomplished pursuant to the provisions of subdivision B 5,
to any person who is a dual resident of Virginia and another state pursuant to
applicable federal law unless he has first obtained from the Department of
State Police a report indicating that a search of all available criminal
history record information has not disclosed that the person is prohibited from
possessing or transporting a firearm under state or federal law.
To establish personal identification and dual resident
eligibility for purposes of this subsection, a dealer shall require any
prospective purchaser to present one photo-identification form issued by a governmental
agency of the prospective purchaser's state of legal residence and other
documentation of dual residence within the Commonwealth. The other
documentation of dual residence in the Commonwealth may include (i) evidence of
currently paid personal property tax or real estate tax or a current (a) lease,
(b) utility or telephone bill, (c) voter registration card, (d) bank check, (e)
passport, (f) automobile registration, or (g) hunting or fishing license; (ii)
other current identification allowed as evidence of residency by 27 C.F.R. §
178.124 and ATF Ruling 2001-5; or (iii) other documentation of residence
determined to be acceptable by the Department of Criminal Justice Services and
that corroborates that the prospective purchaser currently resides in Virginia.
D. If any buyer or transferee is denied the right to purchase
a firearm under this section, he may exercise his right of access to and review
and correction of criminal history record information under §9.1-132 or
institute a civil action as provided in §9.1-135, provided any such action is
initiated within 30 days of such denial.
E. Any dealer who willfully and intentionally requests,
obtains, or seeks to obtain criminal history record information under false
pretenses, or who willfully and intentionally disseminates or seeks to
disseminate criminal history record information except as authorized in this
section, shall be is guilty of a Class 2
misdemeanor.
F. For purposes of this section:
"Actual buyer" means a person who executes the
consent form required in subsection B or C, or other such firearm transaction
records as may be required by federal law.
"Antique firearm" means:
1. Any firearm (including any firearm with a matchlock,
flintlock, percussion cap, or similar type of ignition system) manufactured in
or before 1898;
2. Any replica of any firearm described in subdivision 1 of
this definition if such replica (i) is not designed or redesigned for using
rimfire or conventional centerfire fixed ammunition or (ii) uses rimfire or
conventional centerfire fixed ammunition that is no longer manufactured in the
United States and that is not readily available in the ordinary channels of
commercial trade;
3. Any muzzle-loading rifle, muzzle-loading shotgun, or
muzzle-loading pistol that is designed to use black powder, or a black powder
substitute, and that cannot use fixed ammunition. For purposes of this
subdivision, the term "antique firearm" shall not include any weapon
that incorporates a firearm frame or receiver, any firearm that is converted
into a muzzle-loading weapon, or any muzzle-loading weapon that can be readily
converted to fire fixed ammunition by replacing the barrel, bolt, breech-block,
or any combination thereof; or
4. Any curio or relic as defined in this subsection.
"Assault firearm" means
any:
1. A
semi-automatic center-fire rifle or pistol
which that
expels single or multiple projectiles by action of an explosion of a
combustible material and is equipped
at the time of the offense with a magazine which will hold more than 20 rounds
of ammunition or designed by the manufacturer to accommodate a silencer or
equipped with a folding stock
with a fixed magazine capacity in excess of 10 rounds;
2. A
semi-automatic center-fire rifle that expels single or multiple projectiles by
action of an explosion of a combustible material that has the ability to accept
a detachable magazine and has one of the following characteristics: (i) a
folding, telescoping, or collapsible stock; (ii) a pistol grip that protrudes
conspicuously beneath the action of the rifle; (iii) a second handgrip or a
protruding grip that can be held by the non-trigger hand; (iv) a grenade
launcher; (v) a flare launcher; (vi) a sound suppressor; (vii) a flash
suppressor; (viii) a muzzle brake; (ix) a muzzle compensator; (x) a threaded
barrel capable of accepting (a) a sound suppressor, (b) a flash suppressor, (c)
a muzzle brake, or (d) a muzzle compensator; or (xi) any characteristic of like
kind as enumerated in clauses (i) through (x);
3. A
semi-automatic center-fire pistol that expels single or multiple projectiles by
action of an explosion of a combustible material that has the ability to accept
a detachable magazine and has one of the following characteristics: (i) a
folding, telescoping, or collapsible stock; (ii) a second handgrip or a
protruding grip that can be held by the non-trigger hand; (iii) the capacity to
accept a magazine that attaches to the pistol outside of the pistol grip; (iv)
a shroud that is attached to, or partially or completely encircles, the barrel and
that permits the shooter to hold the pistol with the non-trigger hand without
being burned; (v) a threaded barrel capable of accepting (a) a sound
suppressor, (b) a flash suppressor, (c) a barrel extender, or (d) a forward
handgrip; or (vi) any characteristic of like kind as enumerated in clauses (i)
through (v);
4. A
semi-automatic shotgun that expels single or multiple projectiles by action of
an explosion of a combustible material that has one of the following
characteristics: (i) a folding, telescoping, or collapsible stock;
(ii) a pistol grip that protrudes conspicuously beneath the action of the
shotgun; (iii) the
ability to accept a detachable magazine;
(iv) a fixed magazine capacity in excess of seven rounds;
or (v) any characteristic of like kind as enumerated in clauses (i) through
(iv); or
5. A shotgun with
a magazine that will hold more than seven rounds of the shortest ammunition for
which it is chambered.
An "assault
firearm" does not include any firearm that is an antique firearm, has been
rendered permanently inoperable, is manually operated by bolt, pump, lever, or
slide action, or was manufactured before July 1, 2024.
"Curios or relics" means firearms that are of
special interest to collectors by reason of some quality other than is
associated with firearms intended for sporting use or as offensive or defensive
weapons. To be recognized as curios or relics, firearms must fall within one of
the following categories:
1. Firearms that were manufactured at least 50 years prior to
the current date, which use rimfire or conventional centerfire fixed ammunition
that is no longer manufactured in the United States and that is not readily
available in the ordinary channels of commercial trade, but not including replicas
thereof;
2. Firearms that are certified by the curator of a municipal,
state, or federal museum that exhibits firearms to be curios or relics of
museum interest; and
3. Any other firearms that derive a substantial part of their
monetary value from the fact that they are novel, rare, bizarre, or because of
their association with some historical figure, period, or event. Proof of
qualification of a particular firearm under this category may be established by
evidence of present value and evidence that like firearms are not available
except as collectors' items, or that the value of like firearms available in
ordinary commercial channels is substantially less.
"Dealer" means any person licensed as a dealer
pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §921 et seq.
"Firearm" means any handgun, shotgun, or rifle that
will or is designed to or may readily be converted to expel single or multiple
projectiles by action of an explosion of a combustible material.
"Handgun" means any pistol or revolver or other
firearm originally designed, made and intended to fire single or multiple
projectiles by means of an explosion of a combustible material from one or more
barrels when held in one hand.
"Lawfully admitted for permanent residence" means
the status of having been lawfully accorded the privilege of residing
permanently in the United States as an immigrant in accordance with the
immigration laws, such status not having changed.
G. The Department of Criminal Justice Services shall
promulgate regulations to ensure the identity, confidentiality, and security of
all records and data provided by the Department of State Police pursuant to
this section.
H. The provisions of this section shall not apply to (i)
transactions between persons who are licensed as firearms importers or
collectors, manufacturers or dealers pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §921 et seq.; (ii)
purchases by or sales to any law-enforcement officer or agent of the United
States, the Commonwealth or any local government, or any campus police officer
appointed under Article 3 (§23.1-809 et seq.) of Chapter 8 of Title 23.1; or
(iii) antique firearms or curios or relics.
I. The provisions of this section shall not apply to restrict
purchase, trade, or transfer of firearms by a resident of Virginia when the
resident of Virginia makes such purchase, trade, or transfer in another state,
in which case the laws and regulations of that state and the United States
governing the purchase, trade, or transfer of firearms shall apply. A National
Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) check shall be performed prior
to such purchase, trade, or transfer of firearms.
J. All licensed firearms dealers shall collect a fee of $2 for
every transaction for which a criminal history record information check is
required pursuant to this section, except that a fee of $5 shall be collected
for every transaction involving an out-of-state resident. Such fee shall be
transmitted to the Department of State Police by the last day of the month
following the sale for deposit in a special fund for use by the State Police to
offset the cost of conducting criminal history record information checks under
the provisions of this section.
K. Any person willfully and intentionally making a materially false
statement on the consent form required in subsection B or C or on such firearm
transaction records as may be required by federal law
shall be is
guilty of a Class 5 felony.
L. Except as provided in §18.2-308.2:1, any dealer who
willfully and intentionally sells, rents, trades, or transfers a firearm in
violation of this section shall be is guilty of a Class 6 felony.
L1. Any person who attempts to solicit, persuade, encourage,
or entice any dealer to transfer or otherwise convey a firearm other than to
the actual buyer, as well as any other person who willfully and intentionally
aids or abets such person, shall be is guilty of a Class 6 felony.
This subsection shall not apply to a federal law-enforcement officer or a
law-enforcement officer as defined in §9.1-101, in the performance of his
official duties, or other person under his direct supervision.
M. Any person who purchases a firearm with the intent to (i)
resell or otherwise provide such firearm to any person who he knows or has
reason to believe is ineligible to purchase or otherwise receive from a dealer
a firearm for whatever reason or (ii) transport such firearm out of the
Commonwealth to be resold or otherwise provided to another person who the
transferor knows is ineligible to purchase or otherwise receive a firearm, shall be is guilty of a Class 4 felony
and sentenced to a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment of one year. However,
if the violation of this subsection involves such a transfer of more than one
firearm, the person shall be sentenced to a mandatory minimum term of
imprisonment of five years. The prohibitions of this subsection shall not apply
to the purchase of a firearm by a person for the lawful use, possession, or
transport thereof, pursuant to §18.2-308.7, by his child, grandchild, or
individual for whom he is the legal guardian if such child, grandchild, or
individual is ineligible, solely because of his age, to purchase a firearm.
N. Any person who is ineligible to purchase or otherwise
receive or possess a firearm in the Commonwealth who solicits, employs, or
assists any person in violating subsection M
shall be is
guilty of a Class 4 felony and shall be sentenced to a mandatory minimum term
of imprisonment of five years.
O. Any mandatory minimum sentence imposed under this section
shall be served consecutively with any other sentence.
P. All driver's licenses issued on or after July 1, 1994,
shall carry a letter designation indicating whether the driver's license is an
original, duplicate, or renewed driver's license.
Q. Prior to selling, renting, trading, or transferring any
firearm owned by the dealer but not in his inventory to any other person, a
dealer may require such other person to consent to have the dealer obtain
criminal history record information to determine if such other person is
prohibited from possessing or transporting a firearm by state or federal law.
The Department of State Police shall establish policies and procedures in
accordance with 28 C.F.R. §25.6 to permit such determinations to be made by the
Department of State Police, and the processes established for making such
determinations shall conform to the provisions of this section.
R. Except as provided in subdivisions 1 and 2, it shall be
is unlawful for any person who is not a licensed firearms dealer
to purchase more than one handgun within any 30-day period. For the purposes of
this subsection, "purchase" does not include the exchange or
replacement of a handgun by a seller for a handgun purchased from such seller
by the same person seeking the exchange or replacement within the 30-day period
immediately preceding the date of exchange or replacement. A violation of this
subsection is punishable as a Class 1 misdemeanor.
1. Purchases in excess of one handgun within a 30-day period
may be made upon completion of an enhanced background check, as described in
this subsection, by special application to the Department of State Police
listing the number and type of handguns to be purchased and transferred for
lawful business or personal use, in a collector series, for collections, as a
bulk purchase from estate sales, and for similar purposes. Such applications
shall be signed under oath by the applicant on forms provided by the Department
of State Police, shall state the purpose for the purchase above the limit, and
shall require satisfactory proof of residency and identity. Such application
shall be in addition to the firearms sales report required by the federal
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF). The Superintendent
of State Police shall promulgate regulations, pursuant to the Administrative
Process Act (§2.2-4000 et seq.), for the implementation of an application
process for purchases of handguns above the limit.
Upon being satisfied that these requirements have been met,
the Department of State Police shall immediately issue to the applicant a
nontransferable certificate, which shall be valid for seven days from the date
of issue. The certificate shall be surrendered to the dealer by the prospective
purchaser prior to the consummation of such sale and shall be kept on file at
the dealer's place of business for inspection as provided in §54.1-4201 for a
period of not less than two years. Upon request of any local law-enforcement
agency, and pursuant to its regulations, the Department of State Police may
certify such local law-enforcement agency to serve as its agent to receive
applications and, upon authorization by the Department of State Police, issue
certificates immediately pursuant to this subdivision. Applications and certificates
issued under this subdivision shall be maintained as records as provided in
subdivision B 3. The Department of State Police shall make available to local
law-enforcement agencies all records concerning certificates issued pursuant to
this subdivision and all records provided for in subdivision B 3.
2. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to:
a. A law-enforcement agency;
b. An agency duly authorized to perform law-enforcement
duties;
c. A state or local correctional facility;
d. A private security company licensed to do business within
the Commonwealth;
e. The purchase of antique firearms;
f. A person whose handgun is stolen or irretrievably lost who
deems it essential that such handgun be replaced immediately. Such person may
purchase another handgun, even if the person has previously purchased a handgun
within a 30-day period, provided that (i) the person provides the firearms
dealer with a copy of the official police report or a summary thereof, on forms
provided by the Department of State Police, from the law-enforcement agency
that took the report of the lost or stolen handgun; (ii) the official police
report or summary thereof contains the name and address of the handgun owner, a
description of the handgun, the location of the loss or theft, the date of the
loss or theft, and the date the loss or theft was reported to the
law-enforcement agency; and (iii) the date of the loss or theft as reflected on
the official police report or summary thereof occurred within 30 days of the
person's attempt to replace the handgun. The firearms dealer shall attach a
copy of the official police report or summary thereof to the original copy of
the Virginia firearms transaction report completed for the transaction and
retain it for the period prescribed by the Department of State Police;
g. A person who trades in a handgun at the same time he makes
a handgun purchase and as a part of the same transaction, provided that no more
than one transaction of this nature is completed per day;
h. A person who holds a valid Virginia permit to carry a
concealed handgun;
i. A person who purchases a handgun in a private sale. For
purposes of this subdivision, "private sale" means a purchase from a
person who makes occasional sales, exchanges, or purchases of firearms for the
enhancement of a personal collection of curios or relics or who sells all or
part of such collection of curios and relics; or
j. A law-enforcement officer. For purposes of this
subdivision, "law-enforcement officer" means any employee of a police
department or sheriff's office that is part of or administered by the
Commonwealth or any political subdivision thereof and who is responsible for
the prevention and detection of crime and the enforcement of the penal,
traffic, or highway laws of the Commonwealth.
S. No person
shall purchase an assault firearm from a dealer unless such person is 21 years
of age or older.
T. No dealer
shall sell, rent, trade, or transfer from his inventory an assault firearm to
any person unless such person is 21 years of age or older.
§18.2-308.2:3. Criminal background check required for
employees of a gun dealer to transfer firearms; exemptions; penalties.
A. No person, corporation, or proprietorship licensed as a
firearms dealer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §921 et seq. shall employ any person to
act as a seller, whether full-time or part-time, permanent, temporary, paid or
unpaid, for the transfer of firearms under §18.2-308.2:2, if such employee
would be prohibited from possessing a firearm under §18.2-308.1:1,
18.2-308.1:2, or 18.2-308.1:3, subsection B of §18.2-308.1:4, or §
18.2-308.1:6, 18.2-308.1:7, 18.2-308.1:8,
18.2-308.1:9, 18.2-308.2, or 18.2-308.2:01, or is an
illegal alien, or is prohibited from purchasing or transporting a firearm
pursuant to subsection A of §18.2-308.1:4 or §18.2-308.1:5.
B. Prior to permitting an applicant to begin employment, the
dealer shall obtain a written statement or affirmation from the applicant that
he is not disqualified from possessing a firearm and shall submit the
applicant's fingerprints and personal descriptive information to the Central
Criminal Records Exchange to be forwarded to the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI) for the purpose of obtaining national criminal history
record information regarding the applicant.
C. Prior to August 1, 2000, the dealer shall obtain written
statements or affirmations from persons employed before July 1, 2000, to act as
a seller under §18.2-308.2:2 that they are not disqualified from possessing a
firearm. Within five working days of the employee's next birthday, after August
1, 2000, the dealer shall submit the employee's fingerprints and personal
descriptive information to the Central Criminal Records Exchange to be
forwarded to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) for the purpose of
obtaining national criminal history record information regarding the request.
C1. In lieu of submitting fingerprints pursuant to this
section, any dealer holding a valid federal firearms license (FFL) issued by
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) may submit a sworn and
notarized affidavit to the Department of State Police on a form provided by the
Department, stating that the dealer has been subjected to a record check prior
to the issuance and that the FFL was issued by the ATF. The affidavit may also
contain the names of any employees that have been subjected to a record check
and approved by the ATF. This exemption shall apply regardless of whether the
FFL was issued in the name of the dealer or in the name of the business. The
affidavit shall contain the valid FFL number, state the name of each person
requesting the exemption, together with each person's identifying information,
including their social security number and the following statement: "I
hereby swear, under the penalty of perjury, that as a condition of obtaining a
federal firearms license, each person requesting an exemption in this affidavit
has been subjected to a fingerprint identification check by the Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
subsequently determined that each person satisfied the requirements of 18
U.S.C. §921 et seq. I understand that any person convicted of making a false
statement in this affidavit is guilty of a Class 5 felony and that in addition
to any other penalties imposed by law, a conviction under this section shall
result in the forfeiture of my federal firearms license."
D. The Department of State Police, upon receipt of an
individual's record or notification that no record exists, shall submit an eligibility
report to the requesting dealer within 30 days of the applicant beginning his
duties for new employees or within 30 days of the applicant's birthday for a
person employed prior to July 1, 2000.
E. If any applicant is denied employment because of
information appearing on the criminal history record and the applicant disputes
the information upon which the denial was based, the Central Criminal Records
Exchange shall, upon written request, furnish to the applicant the procedures
for obtaining a copy of the criminal history record from the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. The information provided to the dealer shall not be disseminated
except as provided in this section.
F. The applicant shall bear the cost of obtaining the criminal
history record unless the dealer, at his option, decides to pay such cost.
G. Upon receipt of the request for a criminal history record
information check, the State Police shall establish a unique number for that
firearm seller. Beginning September 1, 2001, the firearm seller's signature,
firearm seller's number and the dealer's identification number shall be on all
firearm transaction forms. The State Police shall void the firearm seller's
number when a disqualifying record is discovered. The State Police may suspend
a firearm seller's identification number upon the arrest of the firearm seller
for a potentially disqualifying crime.
H. This section shall not restrict the transfer of a firearm
at any place other than at a dealership or at any event required to be
registered as a gun show.
I. Any person who willfully and intentionally requests,
obtains, or seeks to obtain criminal history record information under false
pretenses, or who willfully and intentionally disseminates or seeks to
disseminate criminal history record information except as authorized by this
section and §18.2-308.2:2, shall be is guilty of a Class 2
misdemeanor.
J. Any person willfully and intentionally making a materially
false statement on the personal descriptive information required in this
section shall be is
guilty of a Class 5 felony. Any person who offers for transfer any firearm in
violation of this section shall be is guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor. Any dealer who willfully and knowingly employs or permits a person
to act as a firearm seller in violation of this section shall
be is
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
K. There is no civil liability for any seller for the actions
of any purchaser or subsequent transferee of a firearm lawfully transferred
pursuant to this section.
L. The provisions of this section requiring a seller's
background check shall not apply to a licensed dealer.
M. Any person who willfully and intentionally makes a false
statement in the affidavit as set out in subdivision C 1 shall
be is
guilty of a Class 5 felony.
N. For purposes of this section:
"Dealer" means any person, corporation or
proprietorship licensed as a dealer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. §921 et seq.
"Firearm" means any handgun, shotgun, or rifle that
will or is designed to or may readily be converted to expel single or multiple
projectiles by action of an explosion of a combustible material.
"Place of business" means any place or premises
where a dealer may lawfully transfer firearms.
"Seller" means for the purpose of any single sale of
a firearm any person who is a dealer or an agent of a dealer, who may lawfully
transfer firearms and who actually performs the criminal background check in
accordance with the provisions of §18.2-308.2:2.
"Transfer" means any act performed with intent to
sell, rent, barter, or trade or otherwise transfer ownership or permanent
possession of a firearm at the place of business of a dealer.
§18.2-308.2:5. Criminal history record information check
required to sell firearm; penalty.
A. No person shall sell a firearm for money, goods, services
or anything else of value unless he has obtained verification from a licensed
dealer in firearms that information on the prospective purchaser has been
submitted for a criminal history record information check as set out in §
18.2-308.2:2 and that a determination has been received from the Department of
State Police that the prospective purchaser is not prohibited under state or
federal law from possessing a firearm or such sale is specifically exempted by
state or federal law. The Department of State Police shall provide a means by
which sellers may obtain from designated licensed dealers the approval or
denial of firearm transfer requests, based on criminal history record
information checks. The processes established shall conform to the provisions
of §18.2-308.2:2, and the definitions and provisions of §18.2-308.2:2
regarding criminal history record information checks shall apply to this
section mutatis mutandis. The designated dealer shall collect and disseminate
the fees prescribed in §18.2-308.2:2 as required by that section. The dealer
may charge and retain an additional fee not to exceed $15 for obtaining a
criminal history record information check on behalf of a seller.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A and unless
otherwise prohibited by subsection E or
state or federal law, a person may sell a firearm to another person if:
1. The sale of a firearm is to an authorized representative of
the Commonwealth or any subdivision thereof as part of an authorized voluntary
gun buy-back or give-back program;
2. The sale occurs at a firearms show, as defined in §
54.1-4200, and the seller has received a determination from the Department of
State Police that the purchaser is not prohibited under state or federal law
from possessing a firearm in accordance with §54.1-4201.2; or
3. The sale of a firearm is conducted pursuant to §
59.1-148.3, with the exception of a sale conducted pursuant to subsection C of
§59.1-148.3.
C. Any person who willfully and intentionally sells a firearm
to another person without obtaining verification in accordance with this
section is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
D. Any person who willfully and intentionally purchases a
firearm from another person without obtaining verification in accordance with
this section is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
E. No person
shall sell an assault firearm as defined in §18.2-308.2:2 for money, goods,
services, or anything else of value.
Any person who
willfully and intentionally (i) sells an assault firearm as defined in §
18.2-308.2:2 to another person or (ii) purchases an assault firearm as defined
in §18.2-308.2:2 from another person is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
§18.2-308.7. Possession or transportation of certain firearms
by persons under the age of 18; penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to
knowingly and intentionally possess or transport a handgun
or assault firearm anywhere in the Commonwealth. For the
purposes of this section, "handgun" means any pistol or revolver or
other firearm originally designed, made and intended to fire single or multiple
projectiles by means of an explosion of a combustible material from one or more
barrels when held in one hand and
"assault firearm" means any (i) semi-automatic centerfire rifle or
pistol which expels single or multiple projectiles by action of an explosion of
a combustible material and is equipped at the time of the offense with a
magazine which will hold more than 20 rounds of ammunition or designed by the
manufacturer to accommodate a silencer or equipped with a folding stock or (ii)
shotgun with a magazine which will hold more than seven rounds of the longest
ammunition for which it is chambered. A violation of this
section shall be is
a Class 1 misdemeanor.
This section shall not apply to:
1. Any person (i) while in his home or on his property; (ii)
while in the home or on the property of his parent, grandparent, or legal
guardian; or (iii) while on the property of another who has provided prior permission,
and with the prior permission of his parent or legal guardian if the person has
the landowner's written permission on his person while on such property;
2. Any person who, while accompanied by an adult, is at, or
going to and from, a lawful shooting range or firearms educational class,
provided that the weapons are unloaded while being transported;
3. Any person actually engaged in lawful hunting or going to
and from a hunting area or preserve, provided that the weapons are unloaded
while being transported; and
4. Any person while carrying out his duties in the Armed
Forces of the United States or the National Guard of this Commonwealth or any
other state.
§18.2-309.1.
Sale, transfer, etc., of certain firearms magazines prohibited; penalty.
A. As used in
this section, a "large capacity ammunition feeding device" means a
magazine, belt, drum, feed strip, or similar device manufactured on or after
July 1, 2024, that has a capacity of, or that can be readily restored or
converted to accept, more than 10 rounds of ammunition but does not include an
attached tubular device designed to accept and capable of operating only with
.22 caliber rimfire ammunition.
B. Any person who
imports, sells, barters, or transfers a large capacity ammunition feeding device
is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
C. The provisions
of this section shall not apply to the manufacture by, transfer to, or
possession of a large capacity ammunition feeding device by
the Commonwealth or a department, agency, or political subdivision of the
Commonwealth, transfer to or possession of a large
capacity ammunition feeding device by a
law-enforcement officer employed by such an entity for purposes of law
enforcement, or possession of a large
capacity ammunition feeding device by an individual
who is retired from service with a law-enforcement agency and is not otherwise
prohibited from receiving ammunition transferred to the individual by the
law-enforcement agency upon his retirement.
§19.2-386.28. Forfeiture of weapons that are concealed, possessed,
transported, or carried in violation of law.
Any If any firearm, stun weapon as
defined by §18.2-308.1, or any
weapon, magazine, or
trigger activator is concealed, possessed, transported, or carried in violation of §
18.2-283.1, 18.2-287.01, 18.2-287.4, 18.2-287.4:1,
18.2-287.4:2, 18.2-308.1:2, 18.2-308.1:3,
18.2-308.1:4, 18.2-308.1:8, 18.2-308.1:9,
18.2-308.2, 18.2-308.2:01, 18.2-308.2:1, 18.2-308.4, 18.2-308.5, 18.2-308.5:1, 18.2-308.7, or 18.2-308.8, or 18.2-309.1, it shall be
forfeited to the Commonwealth and disposed of as provided in §19.2-386.29.
2. That the provisions of this act may result in a net
increase in periods of imprisonment or commitment. Pursuant to §30-19.1:4 of
the Code of Virginia, the estimated amount of the necessary appropriation
cannot be determined for periods of imprisonment in state adult correctional
facilities; therefore, Chapter 1 of the Acts of Assembly of 2023, Special
Session I, requires the Virginia Criminal Sentencing Commission to assign a
minimum fiscal impact of $50,000. Pursuant to §30-19.1:4 of the Code of
Virginia, the estimated amount of the necessary appropriation cannot be
determined for periods of commitment to the custody of the Department of
Juvenile Justice.